02: Best Practices for Reproducible Scientific Analysis
===================================================

Although there is no universal "best" way to do your research in R, but there are some general principles to adhere to that will make project management easier.

## Treat data as read only

Data is typically time consuming and/or expensive to collect. It is therefore a good idea to treat your data as "read-only". Store modifications to the raw data in a separate file so that you can always distinguish modified data from the raw data.   

## Data Cleaning

In many cases your data will be "dirty" or in need of preprocessing. Writing scripts to clean the data, rather than manually clean in Excel, will give you the ability to reproduce clean data with a click of a button. 

## Store your scripts and data in different directories
Scripts are typically stored in a folder called "bin" or "scripts". Your data should be in another directory, and you can even separate things into a "read-only" and "cleaned" directories.

## Treat generated output as disposable
Anything generated by your scripts can be treated as disposable because it can be regenerated from your scripts. However, you may want to save the various outputs when you are tweaking scripts, and be able to remember the source.

There are lots of different was to manage this output. A separate output folder with different sub-directories for each separate analysis is one nice way to keep track of your daily work if things are well annotated and labeled. If its under version control, that's even better.

## History
You can also save all the commands you've entered using the `history` command. This is especially useful if you've been working in the interactive session rather than working from a script. 


## Version Control
You can set up your project to integrate with git, putting it under version control.
Your can interact with Git and GitHub via RStudio or the shell, but how to do this is beyond the scope of this course.

## Proceed to the Next or Previous lesson
**Next Lesson:** [03 Seeking Help](https://github.com/raynamharris/R_Intro_for_Bioinformatics/blob/master/lessons/03-seeking-help.md)  
**Previous Lesson** [01 R Studio Intro](https://github.com/raynamharris/R_Intro_for_Bioinformatics/blob/master/lessons/01-rstudio-intro.md)